The Boston Neighborhood Change Explorer was built by the City of Boston Planning Department Research Division. For any questions or feedback regarding this tool, please submit a Research Inquiry on [our website](https://www.bostonplans.org/research/).

### Data sources

Most of the data on this website are drawn from 1950-2020 Decennial Censuses and the Research Division’s 2020 and 2024 population estimates. The Research Division creates annual population estimates for Boston to provide alternate estimates to those produced by the U.S. Census Bureau, which continue to underestimate Boston’s population following the disrupted 2020 Census. A presentation overview of the undercount of Boston's population can be found [here](https://bpda.app.box.com/file/1728773149467?s=58u0erzho3hzezg10zez198r5xa3db3g), and a detailed explanation of the evidence for the need for revised population estimates can be found [here](https://bpda.box.com/s/428jr2rsdvij3qdllckhja376hvy2cri).

The Research Division analyzed administrative data from a variety of sources including college and preK-12 school enrollment, housing construction and vacancy data, and births and deaths to create age-specific population estimates at the city, neighborhood, and tract levels for 2020 and 2024. The Research Division further breaks these estimates down by demographic characteristics using 2018-2022 American Community Survey population shares. A detailed explanation of the population estimate methodology can be found [here](https://bpda.box.com/s/326yx0ktp3xd1crn6hhgbruuwo0yavsl).

Housing unit counts beyond 2020 are calculated by combining 2020 decennial Census data with Mayor's Office of Housing data on net new units (based on City of Boston building permits) between April 1, 2020 (the date of the 2020 decennial census) and the present. We apportioned the net new units in each tract to the occupied and vacant categories using an average of 2010 and 2020 Census vacancy rates. The Mayor’s Office of Housing is also the source of the data on housing sales presented here, using data originally compiled and processed by the Warren Group.

For the Children by Race and Ethnicity topic, some values from 1980 and 1990 were imputed (estimated) in order to have more consistent race & ethnicity categories over time. See the "Imputation Methodology" section below for a description of this process.

The topics on business establishments and business loans are reported for "zip code areas", a set of geographic boundaries based on Zip Code Tabulation Areas (ZCTAs) that we designed to allow for better correspondence between tract-level FFIEC Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) data on business loans and zipcode-level business establishment data from the Census. See the "Businesses and Loans Methodology" section below for a description of this correspondence.

The full source code for the Neighborhood Change Explorer is available on [our Github page](https://github.com/bpda-research-division/neighborhood-change) along with documentation for developers.

### Crosswalk Methodology 

The smallest available geography for some variables is the Census tract. Therefore, Boston's neighborhood boundaries are approximated using 2020 Census tract boundaries.<sup>1</sup> The Census Bureau, however, has changed the boundaries of its Census Tracts across the decades. We use the most recent map of Census Tracts (from the 2020 Census), then where necessary, we interpolate data from earlier years’ Census Tracts to conform to the tracts from 2020.

When Census Tracts change, we use that year’s population by Census Block, the smallest geographic unit available in the Census, to create population weights that are used to apportion populations from earlier years to 2020 Census Tracts. In cases where Census Blocks overlap the boundaries of 2020 Census Tracts, the share of block land area on either side of the 2020 tract boundary is incorporated into the weights. In earlier years, when Census Block boundaries are not available, we use a modified method that employs 1990 Census Block geography, the oldest year available.

While there were a fair number of tract boundary changes over the full time period we study, the majority of these boundary changes occur within the larger neighborhood geographies, rather than between them. In these cases, the boundary changes do not affect the neighborhood-level numbers shown on this website, as both portions of the divided tract are aggregated into the same neighborhood.

The methods used here are similar to those used in the commercially available Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB), produced by the Urban Institute and Geolytics, and the public use Longitudinal Tract Database (LTDB) produced by the American Communities Project. Because our geographic scope is limited to Boston, we are able to extend our crosswalk back over a longer time period than either of these sources, and to cover a larger set of variables than is available from the NCDB. Our method also uses block-level population weighting for all years, whereas the LTDB uses area-based weighting for earlier years. Creation of our crosswalk was greatly aided by the availability of historic tract and block-level GIS shapefiles from the National Historical Geographic Information System (NHGIS) at the Minnesota Population Center.

##### <sup>1</sup> Because they cannot be separately identified at the Census tract level, the Leather District is combined with Downtown and Bay Village is combined with the South End. Census Tract 9815.02 is partially in East Boston and partially in Revere, but almost the entire population is in Revere so it is excluded from the East Boston approximation.

### Imputation Methodology (Children by Race and Ethnicity)

In 1980, the primary technique used by the Census to ensure the privacy of individual respondents was to suppress (withhold from publication) certain cells and tables of data that fell below minimum thresholds for population. For census tracts in Suffolk County, MA, the most common racial categories for counts of children to be suppresssed were the Asian American/Pacific Islander, American Indian, and Other Race categories. We estimated numbers of children within each tract for any race by age categories for which population counts were suppressed, using the baseline assumption that the shares of children belonging to each racial category in a given tract should be proportional to the shares of the total (all-ages) population belonging to each category in that tract.

Additionally, the only racial categories for Hispanic children for which population data were published in the 1980 tract-level decennial tables are White, Black, and a category for all other races. We estimated numbers of Hispanic children in the Asian American/Pacific Islander, American Indian, and Other racial categories, again assuming that the shares of non-white, non-black Hispanic children belonging to each of these categories in a given tract are proportional to the shares of the total (all-ages) Hispanic population belonging to these categories in that tract. These estimated Hispanic race by age counts were then subtracted from the total populations of each race by age category in order to infer numbers of non-Hispanic children in each category, ensuring that the racial & ethnic category totals displayed on this tool for 1980 add up to age group totals and better match how race & ethnicity are identified in later censuses.

As a basic quality check, we summed up our imputed tract-level counts of children for each race/ethnicity by age category in Suffolk County and found that they are very close to the counts reported in county-level 1980 Census tables. For most categories, this difference was less than 0.5%, and the biggest difference was 2%. However, the degree of over- or under-estimation of populations for particular race/ethnicity by age categories in 1980 may be greater for individual tracts or neighborhoods, to the degree that our assumptions about the racial composition of children being comparable to that of the population as a whole don't hold up in those places. 

In 1990, the Census moved away from suppression and started using a different set of techniques for ensuring respondent confidentiality, meaning that we didn't have to impute any baseline race by age counts. However, in 1990, published population counts of Hispanic children are not disaggregated by race at either the tract or county levels, meaning that reporting non-Hispanic race by age population counts required imputation of race by age counts for Hispanic children. For these estimates, we again used the baseline assumption that the share of Hispanic children belonging to each racial category in a given tract is proportional to the share of the total Hispanic population in that tract belonging to each racial category. 

### Businesses and Loans Methodology (Zip Code Areas)

Our methods for corresponding data on business dynamics and small business loan activity with each other are approximate and imperfect. In particular, the Census' Zip Code Business Patterns (ZBP) program only reports establishments (business locations) that employ at least one person other than the owner. Small business loans reported in Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) data, however, include all loans worth $1M or less to any kind of business, which likely includes a mix of both employer and non-employer (e.g. sole proprietor) establishments. The loan density metric presented here, number of small business loans per 1000 establishments, is therefore an imperfect measure that likely overestimates true loan densities. 

An additional source of uncertainty is the fact that ZBP business establishments data are originally reported at the zip code level, while CRA small business loans data are reported at the census tract level. We developed "zip code areas" as a common unit of geography that provides an approximate geographic correspondence between tracts and zip codes.

Zip codes do not have inherent polygon geography, since some represent institutional delivery addresses or PO Box locations. The Census provides Zip Code Tabulation Area (ZCTA) polygons to facilitate analysis of zip code data. We assigned the business establishments from every zip code reported in ZBP data to the 2020 ZCTA that contains that zip code's location. For example, data for zip code area 02116 (a ZCTA roughly corresponding with the Back Bay neighborhood) include establishments that use zip code 02116 as well as businesses using zip code 02117 (a PO Box zip code located in Back Bay). 

Subsequently, we combined some ZCTAs with each other in order to provide a better geographic correpondence with census tract boundaries. This step mostly assigns small institutional ZCTAs to their larger neighbors, with 02163 (Harvard's Boston campus) being folded into 02134 (Allston), 02199 (the Prudential Center) being folded into 02116 (Back Bay), and 02203 (South Station) being folded into 02111 (Chinatown/Leather District). However, several larger ZCTAs in downtown Boston with complex shapes were also combined to create the "Zip Codes 02108-10" area (consisting of ZCTAs 02108, 02109, 02110, 02203, and 02133). Each zip code area thus represents one or more 2020 ZCTA polygons.

Finally, we assigned the small business loans data of each tract to the zip code area within which a majority of its land area is contained. Data on small business loans for a given zip code area therefore may not always correspond exactly with the zip code area boundaries. Also, CRA small business loan data are reported using nominal census tract boundaries, with years 1990-2002 using 1990 tract boundaries, years 2003-2011 using 2000 tract boundaries, and 2012-2021 using 2010 tract boundaries. There are therefore a handful of zip code areas and years for which changes in loan activity between census tract vintages may partially reflect tract boundary changes.

#### Broad Industry Grouping definitions

Zip code business establishment counts are originally reported by the Census using 2-digit NAICS codes. We used the following broad industry groupings to report business establishments by industry in a simplified manner: Production, Construction, and Logistics (NAICS 11, 21, 22, 23, 31-33, 42, 48-49), Professional and Business Services (NAICS 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56), Health Care and Education (NAICS 61, 62), Food, Hospitality, and Entertainment (NAICS 71, 72), Retail Trade (NAICS 44-45), and Other Services (NAICS 81).